Sean Gentille: Ben Roethlisberger doesn't sound like he's going to retire
January 24, 2017 12:51 PM
WEB Ben Roethlisberger
WEB Ben Roethlisberger Ben Roethlisberger says he'll consider retirement during the offseason.
Peter Diana/Post-Gazette
Ben Roethlisberger says he'll consider retirement during the offseason.
By Sean Gentille / Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
There’s a chance that Ben Roethlisberger has played his last game for the Steelers — just like there’s a chance that Tom Brady replaces him, or that Donald Trump replaces him, or that that you replace him.

Beyond that, though — the acknowledgement that every player needs to cover his bases, and that most events have at least a non-zero chance of taking place — there’s no real reason for Steelers fans to worry about what Roethlisberger said on Tuesday morning.

The main reason for that: the timing of what he said, and the stuff he said directly beforehand.

Speaking on 93.7 The Fan, Roethlisberger said he’d take the offseason to evaluate his options and decide with his family what to do about next season — “if there’s gonna be a next season,” of course.

“I think at [this] point in my career, at my age, that’s the prudent and smart thing to do every year,” Roethlisberger said.

He was then asked directly if he’d return.

“Like I said, I’m gonna take some time to evaluate with my family and really do a lot of praying about it and make sure it’s the right thing for me and my family.”

He should. Roethlisberger will be 35 in March. Whatever you think about the way he approaches his injuries, he’s dealt with a bunch of them. Football is a brutal sport that destroys bodies and brains; every player should consistently reassess whether they should continue, and no player should be blamed for opting out of the risk.

Still, context for this particular answer is important. The Steelers didn’t just lose to the Patriots; they got clowned. When Roethlisberger and the offense failed to score from the inch-line, they may as well have started walking to the bus. It was a vivisection.