Duke's return to prominence begins with someone — anyone — playing consistently
NCAAB
   January 24, 2017 5:59pm ESTJanuary 24, 2017 4:38pm ESTWith everything that has gone against the Blue Devils, the least they can offer in response is consistent hustle. That was missing against N.C. State, and for more than just one play.
coachk032616-getty-ftr.jpg
Mike Krzyzewski(Getty Images)
Mike DeCourcy  @TSNMike
Updated at 5:59 p.m. ET
If you want to understand what went wrong for Duke in its Big Monday home game against N.C. State, and in a broader sense what has gone wrong for the Blue Devils in this hellish month of January, there are particular aspects of the box score that can give you a clue:

1. Grayson Allen shooting 1-of-9 from 3-point range. He’s playing with Luke Kennard, Frank Jackson, Justin Tatum and Matt Jones. Does he really need to miss eight to know it’s not his night?

2. The combined 74 percent shooting on 2-point attempts by N.C. State big men Ted Kapita and Abdul-Malik Abu. Duke simply got trucked at the rim.

3. Amile Jefferson’s five points and five rebounds in his second game back from a foot injury that cost him two games. Yeah, he’s back. But he’s not back.

4. The sight of only two Duke players topping 30 minutes. It’s nice to have depth and talent. It is possible, though, to have too much of a good thing.

MORE: Grayson Allen's play is cause for concern, not his antics

After starting the season a near-unanimous preseason No. 1, Duke has dealt with a series of injuries that alternately wrecked and hindered its development and now the absence of coach Mike Krzyzewski as he recovers from back surgery. The Blue Devils have lost three of the past four, but more important it has lost any sense of their identity.

If you care to see Duke’s issues encapsulated in the space of a few edifying seconds, all you need to watch is a sequence that began with 4:20 left and Duke protecting a five-point lead. Blue Devils guard Matt Jones launched an open 3-point shot from the right wing that bounced off the rim. It was gathered in the middle of the lane by Abu, who pitched the ball 12 feet left to star freshman point guard Dennis Smith.

Smith did not race the ball up the floor in that circumstance like some sort of cross between De’Aaron Fox and Allen Iverson. He advanced it rationally, assessing the positioning of the other players on the court as he moved. Six seconds later he was beyond every Duke defender and finger-rolled an uncontested layup.

How does that happen?

Gradually, then all at once. (Fast forward to the 1:45 mark).


When the ball came off, the player Duke’s Jayson Tatum was assigned to guard was four steps behind him. Tatum was near the middle of the court. Maverick Rowan was along the left sideline. Rowan did not sprint like Tyson Gay to his position. He changed ends at a typically determined pace. Tatum did not. He soon found himself so far behind in transition that he pointed to classmate Harry Giles and asked him to assume the responsibility of covering Rowan. Giles did as requested. That left the basket entirely unguarded, and when Smith made a sweet spin move to get past Jones there was no one in a Duke uniform to dissuade him.

Tatum at least had Abu covered as a trailer. Abu has made one 3-pointer in three seasons.

“Their run came kind of quick, and it came late in the game,” Kennard said afterward. “We couldn’t answer it. We had open shots. We had great shots. We didn’t hit them. That’s happens sometimes. But when we’re not hitting we’ve got to get stops. Credit to them for executing well on the offensive end, at the same time we couldn’t get stops.”

There has been a lot of discussion regarding whether Duke is a playing selfishly on offense, and there are moments when players work too hard to force their own opportunities. But a viewing of the 40 minutes against N.C. State shows a team that passes the ball willingly through most halfcourt sets. And the Devils had assists on 53 percent of their baskets, with six different players contributing two or more.

MORE: SN's latest Field of 68

Instead, the greater concern seems to be that Duke has not been able to find a definitive answer at point guard. As Kennard said, the Blue Devils played some excellent basketball against N.C. State, particularly in the first half in building a lead that grew as large as 12 points with 37 seconds left in the first half.

But the lack of a player to control the circumstance led to the Devils allowing six points and their lead to be cut in half in what little time remained before the break. They also surrendered a seven-point lead in the final five minutes of the game. In that period, they went 3-of-8 from the field, missed the front end of a 1-and-1 and turned over the ball twice.

Krzyzewski told Sporting News in a preseason interview that he believed the need for a point guard was overstated, that Duke would be fine because it has playmakers. He’s right that Duke can generate offense without a point guard, but without him on the bench the team has been unable to properly manage games.

As substitute coach Jeff Capel took over the team, he asserted the Devils needed to establish their identity featuring a big lineup with Allen playing more regularly at point guard. But Allen has not been able to assert control of the attack, whether it’s because he’s wrestling with his shot (5-of-24 on threes during Krzyzewski’s absence), the injured toe that was evident early in the season or the constant glare of attention in the aftermath of his suspension for tripping. And having taller players hasn’t allowed Duke to resist physical force, which is why Mark Gottfried wisely went with the Abu/Kapita tandem through so much of the game.

Jefferson does not appear healthy. Freshman Harry Giles lacks confidence and authority as he progresses through his recovery from minor preseason knee surgery. The rotation appears unsettled as Duke searches for someone to play consistently at both ends of the court.

All of those elements have contributed to a 3-4 ACC record, good for seventh in a league they were expected to dominate. But with everything that has gone against the Blue Devils, the least they can offer in response is consistent hustle. That was missing against N.C. State, and for more than just one play.