Dabo Swinney says if Browns pass on Deshaun Watson ‘they’re passing Michael Jordan’
1
That’s high praise.
by Richard Johnson@RJ_Writes  Jan 24, 2017, 6:04pm EST
 TWEET
 
 SHARE
 
 PIN
 
 REC
 
Matthew Emmons-USA TODAY Sports
Coaches should always ride for their players both current and former. With a player as transcendent of a talent like Deshaun Watson, it’s easy to see why Clemson coach Dabo Swinney would go all out in effusive praise for his guy.


 Follow
 Mary Kay Cabot ✔ @MaryKayCabot
#Clemson's Dabo Sweeney says If #Browns Hue Jackson passes on Deshaun Watson at 1 he's "passing on Michael Jordan"
1:35 PM - 24 Jan 2017 · Mobile, AL
  457 457 Retweets   735 735 likes
“If they pass on Deshaun Watson, they’re passing on Michael Jordan I’m just telling you.”

It’s not the first time in just the past few days Swinney has come to the public defense of his former QB. It’s also very much in Swinney’s aesthetic to come off like a folksy salesman, primarily because he was a folksy salesman before landing at Clemson as an assistant coach.

Last week, Swinney said this on the Rich Eisen show about anyone who doesn’t view Watson as a first round talent.

"They should lose their jobs," Swinney said. "That is absolutely the craziest thing. They don't know Deshaun. I mean, I can't even tell you how brilliant he is as a football player, as a person, how impactful of a man he is. He's going to change a locker room the day he gets there. He's just so driven, so humble. (He has an) unbelievable understanding of his platform and his skill set is off the charts. He can do anything and everything."

Monday, it was reported that Watson declined to play in the Senior Bowl. The Browns were the worst team in the AFC this season, and therefore get to coach one of the Senior Bowl teams. They’re coaching the South team, which is the one Watson would play on. The Browns also have the No. 1 pick in the upcoming NFL draft. Typically at the Senior Bowl, players get audiences with multiple teams so the franchises can vet who they could possibly select throughout the week as well.

Phil Savage, the executive director of the Senior Bowl, said that Watson said no to the game itself, not necessarily the Browns.

“He never said no to the Browns; he said no, ultimately, to the Reese’s Senior Bowl. I just want to be clear that Deshaun Watson did not say no to Hue Jackson or anybody from the Browns ... I spoke to Deshaun and his agent and he politely declined, but he was honored that we thought he was good enough to come here.”

If the Browns do end up passing on Watson, I can’t wait to hear what Swinney has to say then.